Unity—it is often so elusive
in political, religious, social,
racial, and financial circles.
We love the amazing unity
that we experience
as a global brotherhood.
No matter the country,
one’s background, or former beliefs,
it is amazing
that around the world
we have unity of thought.
Though speaking
hundreds of languages,
there is one singular sound,
or unified message,
that is being preached.
In fact,
Romans 10:17, 18 says:
“So faith follows the thing heard.
“In turn, what is heard
“is through the word about Christ.
“But I ask,
They did not fail to hear, did they?
“Why, in fact,
‘into all the earth
“‘their sound went out,
and to the ends
of the inhabited earth
their message.’”
That is amazing!
Millions believing exactly the same
based on “the word about Christ.”
One singular sound goes out.
That is unity of belief.
Some may say: “Unity of belief?
You’re brainwashed.”
Well, we do agree that our thinking
has been washed clean
from the complicated doctrines
that have evolved
since Jesus walked the earth.
However, the unity of mind
results from a thorough study
of the Scriptures.
It is a matter
of learning God’s Word
and separating its teachings
out from the many doctrines
that have been introduced
by human thinking.
When a classroom
full of students
take a math course,
like algebra,
at the end of the class,
no one accuses them
of being brainwashed
when they all end up
united in their understanding.
They simply learned
the math accurately
and put it to use.
But it is one thing
to be united in thinking
and yet another
to be united in spirit
as a brotherhood.
Going back to a math class:
At the end of the course,
all are united in thought.
They learned algebra.
But that does not mean
they all like each other.
They may have petty rivalry
or outright prejudice
against some of their classmates.
When we learn the truth
from God’s Word,
we become united
not only in thinking
but also in spirit
with our brothers around the world.
Even if we had deep-seated prejudice
in our hearts
before studying
with Jehovah’s Witnesses,
it begins to melt away
when learning the truth.
Why is that?
You will notice as we read
in Ephesians chapter 4
that godly qualities are learned
and perceived.
The bad traits
we might have had before
have to be unlearned.
And Jehovah’s holy spirit helps
mold our personality
to match more closely
the beautiful qualities
mentioned here in Ephesians 4.
Starting with verse 1,
the apostle Paul says:
“Therefore I,
“the prisoner in the Lord,
“appeal to you to walk worthily
“of the calling
with which you were called,
“with all humility and mildness,
“[and] patience,
putting up with one another in love,
“earnestly endeavoring to maintain
“the oneness of the spirit
in the uniting bond of peace.
“One body there is,
and one spirit,
“just as you were called
to the one hope of your calling;
“one Lord,
one faith, one baptism;
“one God and Father of all,
“who is over all and through all
and in all.”
My, that is unity, isn’t it?
All of those fine qualities
reflect the personality of Jesus
—perfect.
He was unspoiled
by the ingrained hatred
and prejudices
that he
may have been exposed to.
So is it easy to curb
ingrained prejudices?
No.
It is not that easy.
It would be good if it was,
but it isn’t.
It is a process.
Sometimes we show
the right spirit
on the outside, but inside
we are still struggling
to cultivate
that true unity
deep in our heart.
Do we have a Bible example
that makes clear
that this is a process
that we must work
our way through?
Yes, there is one
in Galatians chapter 2.
Here, Cephas,
who was usually called Peter,
though Jewish by birth,
had to learn
from Jesus not to be partial.
For many years, he had accepted
non-Jewish fellow worshippers.
He associated with them.
He ate meals
together with them.
But was there still a residue
of prejudice within him?
It seemed so.
His reactions
may have even come as a surprise
to Peter himself.
Read Galatians chapter 2,
verses 11 through 14,
and it says:
“However, when Cephas
“came to Antioch,
I resisted him face-to-face,
“because he
was clearly in the wrong.
“For before certain men
from James arrived,
“he used to eat
with people of the nations;
“but when they arrived,
“he stopped doing this
and separated himself,
“fearing those
of the circumcised class.
“The rest of the Jews
also joined him
“in putting on this pretense,
“so that even Barnabas
“was led along with them
in their pretense.
“But when I saw
that they were not walking
“in step with the truth
of the good news,
“I said to Cephas
before them all:
“‘If you, though you are a Jew,
“‘live as the nations do
and not as Jews do,
“‘how can you compel
people of the nations
to live according
to Jewish practice?’”
What happened to Peter?
Fear of man
caused his former traits
of prejudice to resurface.
And it was contagious,
affecting other Jewish men
around him.
In fact, the verse said:
“Even Barnabas
was led along with them.”
Barnabas was a very warmhearted,
generous person.
His name even means
“Son of Comfort.”
If Peter and Barnabas
could succumb
to this kind of behavior
based on their childhood training,
we need to be very careful.
For a period of time,
it may take
a conscious effort on our part
to maintain unity
with our brothers and sisters
of varying cultures or races.
Was Peter able
to fully eradicate
any residual form
of prejudice from his being?
It seems he was.
Turn now
to 1 Peter chapter 1.
About ten years
after he shunned
the non-Jewish Christians,
Peter was inspired
to write these words,
verse 22:
“Now that you
have purified yourselves
“by your obedience to the truth
“with unhypocritical brotherly affection
“as the result, love one another
intensely from the heart.”
Learning what is right
and then consistently doing what is right
is a process.
We learn the truth gradually.
We soon have unity
of mind and thinking.
However, in time,
we purify ourselves.
How?
The verse said
by our “obedience to the truth.”
And did you notice that Peter says,
“with unhypocritical brotherly affection”?
Not the way he acted
ten years or so earlier.
He even said
to “love one another
intensely from the heart.”
Deep inside,
we would have love for all
in our brotherhood
without even a twinge
of prejudice.
Please turn back
to Ephesians chapter 4.
How does this process
of changing work?
Look at verse 17:
“So this is what I say
“and bear witness to
in the Lord,
“that you should no longer
go on walking
“just as the nations also walk,
in the futility of their minds.”
It makes clear
that we need to change
our thinking—our minds.
And what follows
this unity of thinking?
Verses 22-24:
“You were taught to put away
the old personality that conforms
“to your former course of conduct
and that is being corrupted
“according to its deceptive desires.
“And you should continue
to be made new
“in your dominant mental attitude,
“and should put on
the new personality
“that was created
according to God’s will
in true righteousness
and loyalty.”
Our very personality changes
because of our new
dominant mental attitude.
The beautiful thing
is that this process
is at work in millions
of Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide.
And even though some of us
may still be working
on this kind of unity
deep inside,
this love already shows
on the outside as we mingle
with our brothers
from all over the world.
Psalm 133:1
says it right:
“How good and how pleasant
“it is for brothers
to dwell together
in unity!”